# Synchronised Plasmodium Cell Atlas

Rawat, M., Srivastava, A., **Johri, S.**, Gupta, I., & Karmodiya, K. (2021). Single-Cell RNA Sequencing Reveals Cellular Heterogeneity and Stage Transition under Temperature Stress in Synchronized Plasmodium falciparum Cells. Microbiology Spectrum, 9(1), e00008-21.

Website for Data Exploration: https://sjohri.shinyapps.io/synchronised_plasmodium_cell_atlas/
 
The malaria parasite has a complex life cycle exhibiting phenotypic and morphogenic variations in two different hosts by existing in heterogeneous developmental states. To investigate this cellular heterogeneity of the parasite within the human host, we performed single-cell RNA sequencing of synchronized Plasmodium cells under control and temperature treatment conditions. Using the Malaria Cell Atlas [https://www.sanger.ac.uk/science/tools/mca] as a reference, we identified 9 subtypes of the parasite distributed across known intraerythrocytic stages. For the parasites exposed to temperature stress, we observed the upregulation of the AP2-G gene, the master regulator of sexual development in a small subpopulation of the parasites. We also identified a heterogeneous stress-responsive subpopulation (∼10% of the total population) that exhibits upregulation of stress response pathways under normal growth conditions. We also developed an online exploratory tool that will provide new insights into gene function under normal and temperature stress conditions. Thus, our study reveals important insights into cell-to-cell heterogeneity in the parasite population under temperature treatment that will be instrumental toward a mechanistic understanding of cellular adaptation and population dynamics in *Plasmodium falciparum*.

